Tim
[Music]
he
[Music]
Montage so I'll be
i61 so uh and I like the resolution and
one of the reason I chose this is
because one of the classic cases where
you see AI fall apart is when you have
high density pixel uh patterns so if you
notice her face and her skin uh you know
it's it's clearly a lot of mud and blood
on it but if you look at it in detail
here in Sora Go full screen you can see
that not only did Sora actually give
that mud uh you know keep the pixel
patterns like without going all the
inlace STS but it actually gave it 3D
depth and if you look at her nose like
the tip of her nose you actually see the
blood like culating or hardening there
on the tip like that's just s basically
saying well we know what the world how
it kind of operates how do we take this
image and give it more details even a
little blood splatter with mud on her
teeth obviously her teeth are a little
nice for that era but um the fact that
she never even saw her teeth in the in
the JP
